swam early generally it's a very dry
heat
and the heat will persist in parts of
the outback
it will still be very hot up there the
change won't quite move through
the chain should move through the far
northeast corner on monday
the state might have to wait for
thunderstorms next week to bring any
chance of decent rainfall
natasha calios abc news adelaide
a 29 year old queensland man is behind
bars tonight on terrorism-related
charges
he's accused of preparing a terrorist
attack and seeking firearms training
if convicted he could spend life in
prison
it's an accusation bundaberg residents
find hard to believe
yeah it's pretty scary pretty scary to
think that it could have been here i
heard it on the radio this morning
and i was very surprised that such an
incident would happen in bundaberg
because it's not a sort of place that
has that sort of environment 29 year old
james michael war was arrested yesterday
by the joint counter-terrorism task
force
that's made up of federal police
queensland police and the domestic spy
agency
azio in a statement police say it'll be
alleged that
electronic devices seized in a raid
contained documents indicating a desire
to commit acts of terrorism
the 29 year old didn't appear in court
today his mother traveled from bundaberg
and sat
at the back of the courtroom magistrate
zak sara said
this is an allegation on the 3rd of
september 2020
at bundaberg the james michael ward did
an act in preparation
for a terrorist attack and was allegedly
taking steps to seek out firearms
training
contrary to the commonwealth criminal
code that's a serious allegation
the magistrate added it is your honor
the crown prosecutor replied
the maximum sentence for these offences
is
life imprisonment it is incredibly
serious the accused mother has changed
her social media profile to her son's
image
with the tag justice for james the
magistrate described today's proceedings
as a bit of an anti-climax the mat has
been adjourned until the 4th of december
mr ward didn't apply for bail and he'll
be held here in the brisbane watch house
to appear via video link on friday
george roberts abc news
brisbane a couple has been charged with
manslaughter after the death of a
toddler who was allegedly left in a hot
car in north queensland
police were called to the townsville
university hospital yesterday afternoon
where the girl had been taken by the
pair the 37 year old mother laura pavaro
and her 29 year old partner aaron hill
have had their cases adjourned until the
14th of december
certainly we'll be looking at all facets
in relation to the care of this child
um not only today but leading up to
these events this is such
a tragedy uh clearly there is an ongoing
police investigation my
my heart goes out to the community the
family
detectives say the pair was not known to
police and the couple
has been remanded in custody
three people have died and another is
fighting for their life
after a two-car crash in south
australia's southeast
it's the first fatal crash in the region
all year
and follows the death of a man in
another road crash north of adelaide
last night police are warning drivers to
take extra care as borders reopen
and as the festive season begins
local police have described the head-on
crash as an absolute tragedy
the worst possible outcome three people
dead
here we are a month before christmas the
two cars collided on the prince's
highway
about five kilometers west of mount
gambier early this afternoon
the ford territory was heading towards
millicent three people in that vehicle
died at the scene
a 39 year old woman 77 year old woman
and an 80 year old man all from
millicent
the other car a toyota land cruiser was
heading towards mount gambier
five people inside were injured one of
them critically
in the limestone coast this year we have
not had
any lives lost on our road none and in
one fell swoop
three people have lost their lives and
five others have been treated in
hospital
major crash investigators from adelaide
will now try and work out what went
wrong
you can see the roads clearly defined by
barrier lines
and what's happened is two vehicles have
collided on one side of the road
so that begs some questions and our
major crash people will
put those pieces together with christmas
just a month away in essays border with
victoria opening on tuesday
police are expecting more people on the
road and are sending this message
to stay safe and do the right thing
police will be out in force
we've all gone through so much hardship
this year the last thing we need
is something like this to occur again
and a man has been killed in a crash
last night at freiling north of adelaide
the driver appears to have lost control
and crashed his car into a tree
the 46 year old man died at the scene 85
lives have been lost on south australian
roads this year
compared to 101 at this time last year
beck wetham abc news a man has drowned
at a remote beach
on south australia's york peninsula
after falling from the rocks there
this is police hold grave concerns for a
fisherman
still missing in the waters of the lower
lakes officers say
they won't give up on the search for the
missing husband and father
a tragic end to a camping trip after a
man in his thirties drowned at the
popular innis national park
police say he fell from the rocks at
brown's beach this morning disappearing
underwater
his body was pulled unresponsive from
the ocean two hours later
a search for a missing fisherman in lake
alexandrina
southeast of adelaide was called off
early so the aircraft could be diverted
to the york peninsula rescue
emergency services had been searching
for two days for a much-loved young
father and husband
who is now also feared dead in waters
near malang
the nature of the lake the choppiness
from yesterday
unfortunately i'd have to say that we
don't hold very good hopes that we're
going to find them
police say a group of seven people had
been fishing for carp on the lake shores
when two decided to venture into the
water in an inflatable canoe
quickly getting into trouble in the
choppy water the wind here is a big tree
unless you know what you're doing with a
boat or a floaty or anything like that
it can be very dangerous a 19 year old
man was rescued several hours later
after drifting
three and a half kilometres east from
where the pair set off
the inflatable canoe was also found
intact floating in the water
but the 31 year old man from brahma
lodge in adelaide's north
is still missing police say the men who
were from sri lanka
couldn't swim and weren't wearing life
jackets
we're not going to give up even though i
say you know we don't
hold high hopes we will continue until
for as long as we can local farmers have
been asked to search their properties
for any sign of the missing fishermen
the search will resume tomorrow claire
campbell abc news
the prime minister has defended the
diversity of australia's trade
relationships
as tensions with china continue to
escalate
from today china is imposing major
tariffs on all australian wine
it's a devastating blow for exporters
but some producers say they're already
focusing on other markets
here's political reporter jade mcmillan
australian customers make up the bulk of
graham shaw's business
but up until recently at least 20
percent of his wines were sold to china
trade that's now on hold i've been
looking at other markets mainly in
singapore and vietnam we have a draft
contract now in place from a
large singaporean organisation and
vietnam's looking pretty good too china
has accused australian producers of
selling wine below the cost of
production
imposing temporary tariffs from just
over 100
to more than 200 it's the latest in a
list of australian products to be
affected
as the relationship between the two
countries continues to deteriorate
what the government is doing is seeking
to
address what seems to be a concerning
pattern of behaviour
by the chinese against australia
more than one billion dollars worth of
australian wine was sent to china in the
past year
making up almost 40 percent of
australia's total wine exports you never
want to be
too beholden to a single market and it's
the government's job to help
industry spread its risk there has not
been
a government more committed to opening
up and developing
myriad trade opportunities than the
government that was elected in
2013. the australian government insists
the tariffs are unwarranted and
unfair and it's vowed to challenge them
but there's unlikely to be a resolution
anytime
soon causing enormous uncertainty for
exporters
as well as questions about what it could
mean for the domestic market
i am concerned that a number of the
larger brands
may consider selling it into the
australian market at a lower price than
normal
if they do that that's going to affect
the thousands of smaller growers in
australia
an industry hit hard as its most
valuable export market is shelved
jade mcmillan abc news canberra
[Music]
heading overseas iran's most senior
nuclear scientist has been assassinated
near the capital tehran the attack comes
just days after the release
of australian kylie moore gilbert who
spent more than
two years in iranian jails on espionage
charges
iran is blaming israel for the scientist
death and is threatening retaliation
chief foreign correspondent phil
williams reports
in a town outside tehran carnage the
bullet holes and wreckage of what
appears to have been
a carefully coordinated attack musan
fakhrizadeh
was the nation's best-known nuclear
scientist that made him a target
an iranian journalist described a truck
laden with explosives
and another vehicle filled with gunmen
who opened fire killing the scientist
and injuring his bodyguards
he possessed a high scientific status
and a long background
in the country's defence advances the
israeli government had already accused
him of being the brains behind iran's
attempt to build a nuclear bomb
which the israeli prime minister warned
two years ago had not stopped
despite iranian assurances to the
country a key part of the plan
was to form new organizations to
continue the work
this is how dr mukhsen fakhi zadeh head
of project about put it remember that
name
the iranian government has no doubts
this was an israeli audit assassination
supported by the americans the threats
of revenge came quickly
the iranian foreign minister javid zarif
tweeted
this cowardice with serious indications
of israeli role
shows desperate warmongering among
perpetrators
being an iranian nuclear scientist has
been a dangerous job
with assassinations in 2010 and 2012
again blamed on the israelis who said
nothing about this latest attack
president trump made no secret he
approved the killing of revolutionary
guards major general solomani
during a visit to baghdad earlier this
year
with tensions high and fears of iranian
retaliation
incoming president biden is going to
have a delicate diplomatic dance ahead
if he's to make good on plans to
renegotiate the nuclear
deal with iran abandoned by president
trump
the iran deal is defective
whoever did this and the iranians are
convinced it was israel
may well have wanted this latest
assassination done
before joe biden had a chance to say no
philip williams abc news the president
of belarus alexander lukashenko has
hinted that he may leave office
this after months of protests against
his re-election he didn't give a
timeline on when that would happen
but says he supports reform to the
constitution that would weaken the
office of president
and he wouldn't be leader when changes
are made
indigenous ranger groups in the western
top end are working together to start a
carbon abatement business
by using early season burns to prevent
wildfires
now the project is expected to create
jobs for remote communities
and to improve fire management in the
daily river port keats aboriginal lands
trust
fire can be an unforgiving element in
the western top end
indigenous rangers in the community of
wad air are honing their fire management
skills to fight
future wildfires the history of this
part of the western top end is big fires
just
going right across the whole land trust
every year virtually every square inch
getting burnt
and so it's not good for the plants the
animals the carbon
preventing big fires through early
burning also earns carbon credits that
can be sold on the carbon market to
offset
emissions from others that's why ranger
groups in the daily river port keats
aboriginal land trust are starting up a
joint carbon abatement business
creating more jobs for other ad stations
community
like more ranges and to work at country
you know
like get them at bush i saw them little
kids no i'm when they're finishing
school
and will be end up teaching them the
last hurdle is the final approval of a
section 19 land use agreement
but already funding from the indigenous
land and sea corporation has allowed
rangers to do early burning
and count credits for the first time
this last dry season
very conservative estimate of saving
about 30 000 tons of emissions from the
average over the last few years stopping
big fires
also helps other industries in the land
trust like this bushfood harvester
we had a pretty rough first year
we picked about 300 kilos of fruit
and then we got burnt out second year we
picked um
four times that amount and we got burnt
out again
so fire is our biggest threat out here
the spark of a carbon industry in the
western top end
is now a light john daly abc news
water turning to sport all-rounder
cameron green could make his
much-anticipated debut for australia
in tomorrow's second one dare against
india in sydney
marcus stoyner suffered a side strain in
the home side 66 run win in game
one last night the australians weren't
at their best in the field
but a run chase of 375 proved a little
too much
for the visitors peter lusted reports
a comfortable win against one of
cricket's juggernauts
was only soured by a low-grade side
straight to marcus joyner's
winner straight away the australians
need a batsman that can bowl a few
others
which could be moses on reeks or young
west australian cameron green
i faced him for a couple of balls um
this afternoon in the nets before the
game and
the first time i've seen him bowl when
he bowls a heavy bowl
um so he's you know he looks an
impressive talent
smith was back to his best with the
third fastest odi century for an
australian
while aaron fincher's ton and glenn
maxwell's creativity
propelled the total to 374.
that's a freaky shot that is freaky
well not many players can do that the
australians had some struggles with the
ball
mitchell stark with the second most
expensive opening over
in odi history his opening partner josh
hazelwood took three wickets though
including the big one fired coley
[Applause]
with the biggest wicket the australians
were nowhere near their best in the
field
putting down four catches can't say it
he said
hardik panger and shika darwin added 128
for the fifth wicket
to keep indian hopes alive but adam
zamper got rid of them both
on the way to a fourth wicket hall 375
proved too big a chase with the indians
left to consider
other bowling options maybe next time
finchy's batting i'll try and bowl a few
to him because he doesn't want to get
out to me
while both sides need to work on their
over rights with the match finishing an
hour late
at 10 past 11. it felt like it went all
day um
that was the longest 50 overs in the
field i've ever had that's for sure
they'll have to change something or the
one day or on sunday
could run into monday peter lusted abc
news
a dominant 26 points from opel star liz
cambage has led the south side flyers
to a 24 point win over the townsville
fire in the wnbl
in the late game this afternoon adelaide
captain stephanie talbot
had a big first half as the lightning
built a narrow lead over sydney
natalie burton was doing her best to
give the flames a real spark
but it was talbot who was the clear
difference between the two sides
comes up with a downhill more points
an adelaide home by 22 points and now
four wins from five games
while sydney's finals hopes are fading
[Music]
on the satellite troughs are triggering
showers and storms in northern western
australia and the northern territory
abroad trough is also directing intense
heat across central australia to south
australia
and also the eastern states scattered
storms in victoria and southern new
south wales
as onshore winds bring a few showers to
southern western australia
looking around the country for tomorrow
mostly sunny in the southeast and
northwest of
queensland hot and rainy in the
northeast and a hot windy day for the
southwest
another hot day for new south wales and
the a.c.t cloudy in the northeast and
windy in the states south and west
in victoria clearing showers and cool
temperatures in the south
mostly sunny and warm in the north
turning to tasmania
showers easing and contracting to the
west and northeast by late morning
they're mostly clearing by the afternoon
mostly sunny across south australia
cool conditions for the southeast and
central parts of the state but a warm
day for the north
for western australia showers and storms
over the northeast
sunny and hot in the northwest cloudy
and cool in the states south
and in the northern territory showers
storms and hot weather in the top
northwest of the top end
mostly sunny and hot for item land in
the interior and late showers after a
hot day in the south
looking ahead to monday's forecast for
our capital city is a warm cloudy day
for sydney
hot and mostly sunny in brisbane a warm
mostly sunny day for melbourne hobart
and canberra
clearing showers in perth and a hot day
for adelaide a possible storm
expected for you in darwin
well that's the latest from abc news
remember you can keep
up to date at news.abc.net.u and on
eyeview
i'm miriam saab stay with us for one
plus one coming up next year thank you
for your company tonight
[Music]
[Applause]
it was a summer that burnt a hole in the
heart of the country
and we lost whole animal cultures now
come the incredible stories of hope
nature will come back it's happening
already and resilience
feels amazing i'm just so stoked to see
this little one
narrated by hugo weaving it will take
many years and much human help wild
australia
after the fires tuesday 8 30 on abc and
eye view
once a year our great barrier reef
explodes with new life
join us for a live television special
revealing the secrets of the reef
at the time of its annual mass spawning
event
we'll have experts above and below the
water
and cameras running night and day
looking at the health of the reef and
how it's responding to the challenges of
our time
over two big nights reef live starts
this friday on abc
and iview
we are one but we are
many and from
all the lands on earth we call
we share a dream
i am
[Music]
welcome to oneplus one the latest in a
series of interviews focusing on
leadership this week's guest was a heavy
hitter in the public service even 30
years ago
when this building behind me old
parliament house was the seat of
government
his name is dennis richardson dennis
went on to head the department of
foreign affairs and the department of
defense
he was chief of staff to a prime
minister he headed up asio for nine
years
and he was ambassador to the united
states
oh
[Music]
[Applause]
i think dennis richardson is an
outstanding public servant who's
served governments of both political
persuasion
with great professionalism and great
loyalty
dennis richardson welcome to oneplus one
thanks barry
you've held many senior positions here
and overseas
but in all of those positions you've
been accountable to a politician or at
least you report
to a politician so my question is can a
public servant
really lead or is a public servant
locked into this
sort of master servant relationship well
barry it really is
a bit of both uh ultimately the decision
makers
are ministers as they should be um
however public servants can lead however
i think
it's a very different sort of leadership
to a to a public position within your
own organisation you do it
there are occasions when prime minister
when
public servants need to be more public
i would give the example of ken henry
the secretary of treasury
during the global financial crisis
clearly
kevin rudd was the leader as prime
minister
and also there was the treasurer however
ken henry was very much out there uh
within that framework
i'd also give the example of the head of
asio
both before and after 9 11
before 9 11 counter-terrorism was very
much
on the periphery of government
priorities after 9 11 it moved to the
centre
of government priorities therefore the
role of the director general of asia
changed very directly and it was
important to be out there
more publicly but as a general rule
leadership by a public servant is best
done
quietly and behind the scenes what drew
you to the public service in the first
place
the abc had a role um
when i was a kid uh i would
always listen to abc news two or three
times a day on the weekend even when i
was 12
13 i must have been half mad when i went
to
if i went to the doctors or went to the
dentist i'd always read time magazine or
so i always had an interesting current
affairs applied for a
teacher scholarship not expecting to go
to university ended up at university
and the person who was my history
history supervisor dr neville maney from
sydney university
he said to me at the end of third year
before entering honours year he said how
do you feel about
going on to teaching in a couple of
years time i said i don't really
he said have you thought about the
department of external affairs
and i said what's that and he explained
it
so i applied so all of that reading kind
of led you in that direction
absolutely always been interested in
current affairs and
i think to be an effective public
servant
i think you've got to be interested in
current affairs you've got to have an
interest in
in politics without it being party
political
you were known that for giving frank and
fearless advice and you didn't wait to
be asked
quite often was it easier in your day
though is politics more partisan these
days
it well i think as a general statement
it is
however i've never worked for a prime
minister
or for a minister from either side of
politics
with whom you couldn't have a very good
disagreement
sometimes you mightn't speak to one
another for 36 hours
because of the disagreement you've got
that willing uh it can
oh yeah oh yeah it it can get
very willing but prime ministers
and ministers are more able to
accommodate
sharp differences of view than what a
lot of people think how do you go about
it though if there is a conflict that
you think maybe the government is headed
in the wrong direction on a particular
issue or there might even be
you might sniff some impropriety around
what they're doing
what's your approach how do you go about
it well first of all you've got to know
the people
i think my wife was a real estate agent
she always said that
selling houses was about people not
about houses
and to some extent policy is about
people not just
esoteric policy and in the same way
if you want to influence someone in your
own household
you need to know whether a morning
person afternoon person
you need to know what makes them tick if
you want to influence a minister or a
prime minister you need to know that too
but you need to understand what are the
central driving forces
within the party which is within
government
now at the same time giving so-called
frank and fearless advice
is not about getting something off your
chest it's about influencing
so you don't you don't walk into a prime
minister's office or to a minister's
office
simply to walk outside afterwards and
say
bye gee i told them what i thought well
if you've had no influence
that's not being frank and fearless
that's being a fool
so i i think you do need to know the
person
you do need to know the policy content
and you need
you do need to pick your opportunity and
you do need to pick your fight
and you do need to pro you do need to be
prepared to lose
you'll never win every fight you engage
in
if you're not prepared to fail you can't
win has the relationship changed over
the years though you
get the sense sometimes that politicians
more often than they used to politicize
the public service and
and then sometimes you get examples
where they the the public servants
themselves
seem to be taking political positions
that can happen
uh i think there's been a slow slide
in that direction but barry it's not
black and white uh in 1991 in december
when paul keating replaced
bob hawke we had
two days to clear out the prime
minister's office
after him having been there for nine
years i had a particular
bit of paper that was brought to you
with the chief of staff i was chief of
staff
i had a particular piece of paper
brought to me
which was dated 1983.
and it was a piece of paper that was
written in the lead up to the 1983
election
and it went through all the then heads
of commonwealth departments and
made comments about what they were like
what they weren't like
uh and whether the writer thought they
could work constructively with an
incoming labor government
so we shouldn't pretend that there was a
time
when life was pure it's always been
a bit gray uh i think the gray has
darkened up
but the starting point has not been lily
white
what is your view on on governance um
it's it's
perception if not the reality in the
minds of a lot of people
that governance has taken a bit of a hit
over the last 10 years or so and not
just because we've had this revolving
door of prime ministers it it's i think
the concerns run far deeper than that
have you detected the same thing uh
i'd make a couple of comments first of
all
i think people underestimate just how
hard ministers and prime ministers work
i don't believe there's anyone in this
country with the daily pressure on them
as the prime minister whether they're a
coalition or with their labor party
prime minister
they all work really really hard and
they by and large have the country's
interests
at heart you may disagree with them that
but they by and large do
ministers for the most part are in are
in the same category
however i i do think there have been
certain developments in respect of
governance
i think the role and nature
of ministerial staffers has changed
most of them are very very good and high
grade
but you do get occasions more so now
than in the past
where there's a certain
question mark around them well because
they demand too much authority
of their own i have on two occasions
once with a coalition staffer
and once with a labor party staffer
i have on two occasions had propositions
put to me
which if it acted upon would have been
illegal
now i don't think they were deliberately
seeking to break the law
but it took a heck of an argument to get
them to
understand that look if you go down that
path
it is illegal and you can't do that is
that because the advisors are more
inexperienced these days or are they
just too political for their own good
too much of a tendency to think that the
ends
justify the means there are other issues
around governance too that go to
campaign donations in know political
donations it just seems there's no
appetite on either side of
the major party to do anything about
that there's a sort of a reluctance to
have a corruption
commission there the sports grants
thing that has exploded this year but
there are a lot of things that are
frustrating the public around politics
yeah and i personally my own view
on a federal integrity commission has
changed
i was of the view for a long time that
it was unnecessary
at the commonwealth level uh i do
believe
that public trust has been eroded to the
point where i think
an integrity commission would be
worthwhile and what do you think has
eroded that
public trust well i think there's
cynicism now in respect of all
professions
you know there's it's very difficult to
name a profession
which has not been diminished in the
eyes of the general public over the last
40-odd years and i'm not quite sure
what that is yeah but some of them have
been stand outside the banks yeah
the churches have had a bad run and then
politics has had such a
tumultuous time also the public service
yeah
um journalism yeah um i think
you name it i i suspect uh
academics may be one of the few standing
but even them
uh some of them get so caught up in one
side of politics or the other
that they undermine their own
credibility here with the youngest
taylor matter as well
that and again i'll ask you about the
federal police in a moment and
your views around around them but the
point about this one
is they had to look at whether or not
documents were falsified and whether the
minister was in any way involved
and they said it wasn't really a matter
in the end of much
importance um that was one of the
reasons there were others they thought
that would be difficult to get to the
bottom of it as well and it would take
up a lot of time
but it just seems that goes to public
trust and any if there is
if there are falsified documents out
there and they become part of the public
debate i don't see why that's not a
matter of some importance
oh yeah but barry going back decades
i've never seen an afp investigation
end up on a minister's desk
it stops at the door and why is that
i think it is extraordinarily difficult
for the afp to take an investigation to
the nth degree
and i have some sympathy for the afp
in respect to the angus taylor matter i
think they probably genuinely took it as
far as they could
they ended up ruling that they could
find no evidence
of the minister having falsified uh the
documents
that didn't surprise me don't forget the
whole thing
had a bit of politics wrapped in it from
the beginning
it was referred to the police uh by the
opposition
so it there was a bit of argi bhaji from
the beginning
it just seems though that that too often
the case now that um
the governments tend to refer leaks to
the afp and i'm not sure whether the afp
would particularly welcome
that trend where the leaks are from
certain quarters
they are rarely referred to the afp
where they are thought to be from other
quarters they are referred to the afp
yes
i had one occasion personal experience
where there was a particular matter
about me on the front page
of the newspaper and
a minister phoned up
a secretary demanded an inquiry
i happen to know the journalist really
really well
and on this occasion i'll never reveal
the name of the journalist
on this occasion the journalist told me
how he got the story and it was from the
minister
who asked the secretary to inquire into
the matter
so how do you deal with something like
that yeah well
you just have to suck it up well no you
have a sense of humor
one hell of a sense of humor because it
does seem as if
like a minister we know that ministers
leak you know in their offices league
and
and it seems that if a minister leaks
and that's not going to be investigated
not to the nth degree anyway but if a
journalist gets hold of a leak that's
uncomfortable for the government
that will take up a lot of afp's time
yeah but to some extent
ministers do have the right to
provide information to journalists
even in the former league in a way in
which public servants don't
it is quite right that public servants
should not be able to operate under the
same rules
as ministers so i i don't
have a problem with a certain amount of
that i do get
i the one of the reasons why i think
there is a need for a
a commonwealth integrity commission too
often now
are on important matters inquiries
exclude ministerial staff
and i do think we probably need a
commission
to regain public trust on donald trump
who's proving to be quite an
extraordinary president in so many ways
you were asked about this about 18
months ago i think the national press
club and you said you can't build a
relationship with another country
based on an emotional reaction to one
person
is that thesis becoming more difficult
by the way to hold up
i continue to believe in that very
strongly uh
you can't allow an alliance such as that
which exists between australia and the
united states
to be held hostage to one person's
personality
that one person happens to be the leader
of the country yeah so
isn't he framing the relationship in a
sense uh
in part however the relationship goes
beyond individuals
and you've got to look out over the long
term malcolm turnbull who
not so long ago was dealing directly
with donald trump
and he talked in a tweet about uh
alternative facts
coming from donald trump he seemed lying
is normalized
now just coming from an ex-politician
that's one thing but this this was a guy
who not so long ago i was dealing
personally with with donald trump
is that the sign of somebody who's just
suddenly freed up from politics and
telling it as it is
could be i i do think there is an issue
in terms of alternative facts fake news
call it what you like but i think there
is a genuine
concern there should be a genuine
concern
about democratically elected leaders in
western countries
blatantly telling porkies i i mean that
that does undermine trust and it goes to
the foundations of our system
because this year malcolm turnbull's
quotes were in response to a suggestion
that the
trump camp are about to unleash a huge
disinformation campaign
in the run-up to the election u.s
politics are very partisan
and i think it would be very
difficult to look at u.s politics today
and simply condemn one side
i think i think we're lucky in this
country
quite frankly i think it'd be a great
thing
if someone like scott morrison was
running
for the republican party nomination and
someone like anthony albanese
was running for the democrats um i
i despite all of our cynicism
and despite all of our mocking of
leaders we're not
badly placed as a country we don't have
bad
people as our leaders the ansys alliance
and i judge by by what you're saying you
don't see any particular stresses being
placed on that alliance
uh you you could get stresses placed on
it but i think
i think if you look at at broader
politico
strategic developments in our part of
the world that alliance
is as important as what it's ever been
back in
1940 when
japan was flexing its muscles
we reached across the pacific to open
our first independent diplomatic mission
in washington fast forward
to the 21st century it's perfectly
reasonable
that as a big country and a big power
rises
in our part of the world it's just
natural for us to reach across the
pacific
to the other big gorilla on the other
side of the lake
look we have obvious challenges in
respect of the us and china
stripped to its essence you can describe
the relationship with both countries
in the following terms friends with both
allies with one
now is that sustainable friends with
both allies with one
that is sustainable now equally
it's very important that we are not
driven by paranoia
in respect of china china
is a country the relationship of which
has changed fundamentally since about
2012.
between 1972 and 2012
there was a very easy relationship in
which we'll constantly building
it's now a relationship of some
complexity where we have agreements
and disagreements and that's the way
it's going to remain
equally we need to find areas of
agreement with china
and we need to be seeking to build the
relationship
as constructively as we can not at the
expense
of our strategic alliance with the
united states
but simply in terms of our own national
interests so china should be comfortable
about that that
we can be friends but hey our number one
allies united states
absolutely i mean we should not
compromise on
on that we like to think of ourselves as
punching above our weight most countries
do actually
do you think we do look our challenge is
to punch up to our weight
uh there are 193 countries in the united
nations
we're the sixth largest in land area